---
layout: post
title: Lesson 1 - A very fast paced introduction to the foundations
image: /assets/img/lessons/measure.png
accent_image: 
  background: url('/assets/img/sampling_space.png') center/cover
  overlay: false
accent_color: '#ccc'
theme_color: '#ccc'
description: >
  How to view probability from a measure theoretic perspective.
invert_sidebar: true
---

# Lesson 1 - A very fast paced introduction to the foundations

### Required reading for this lesson

### Optional reading for this lesson

### [Slides](/assets/slides/r255-l1.pdf)

#### Video (soon)


In this lecture we give a very fast paced introduction to a perspective on probability some of you might have encountered, some of you might have not: measure theory.


*[SERP]: Search Engine Results Page

## 1. Measure Theory


## 2. ODEs

Now that we have a measure theoretic perspective on probability, we can start to think about how to define stochastic differential equations.

To do this, let's first remember what an ordinary differential equation is. An ordinary differential equation is a differential equation that contains one or more functions of one independent variable and the derivatives of those functions. The term ordinary is used in contrast with the term partial differential equation which may be with respect to more than one independent variable. An example ODE is the following:

$$\frac{d x}{d t} = -\alpha x$$

This is a first order ODE, because it contains the first derivative of $$x$$. It is also a linear ODE, because it is linear in $$x$$. It is also an time-invariant ODE, because it does not depend on $$t$$.

In general, we often write *linear differential equations* like this:

$$\frac{d x}{d t} = F(t) x(t) + L(t) w(t)$$

where $$F(t)$$ is a function of time, $$x(t)$$ is the state of the system at time $$t$$, $$L(t)$$ is a function of time and $$w(t)$$ is some forcing or driving function; in applications, this coud for example be an input to a system.

A useful special case of this are *linear time-invariant differential equations*:

$$\frac{d x}{d t} = F x(t) + L w(t)$$

where $$F$$ and $$L$$ are constant. We can solve such equations via methods like *separation of variables* or, for the case of *inhomgeneous* equations, via the *integrating factor* method.

For general linear differential equations, we can solve them via methods like Fourier or Laplace transforms or via numerical methods. Linear differential equations are useful to consider since they arise in many equations and can be solved analytically. They will also be useful for us to consider when we think about stochastic differential equations.

## 3. SDEs

A pragmatic way to think about stochastic differential equations is to think about them as ODEs with some noise added. For example, let's think about a car in 2 dimensions that is governed by the following ODE resulting from Newton's second law:

$$
\begin{align}
\textbf{f}(t) &= m \textbf{a}(t) 
              &= m \frac{d^2 \textbf{x}(t)}{d t^2}
$$

where $$\textbf{f}(t)$$ is the force acting on the car, $m$ is the mass of the car, $$\textbf{a}(t)$$ is the acceleration of the car and $$\textbf{x}(t)$$ is the position of the car. 

Let's say that our acceleration is now not precisely known/we have a measurement error in our acceleration. We can model this by adding some noise to our acceleration and descrie it by a random white-noise process $$\textbf{w}(t) = (w_1(t), w_2(t))$$:

$$\frac{d^2 \textbf{x_1}(t)}{d t^2} = w_1(t);   \frac{d^2 \textbf{x_2}(t)}{d t^2} = w_2(t)$$

Now if we define $$x_3 = \frac{d \textbf{x_1}(t)}{d t}$$ and $$x_4 = \frac{d \textbf{x_2}(t)}{d t}$$, we can write this as a system of first order ODEs in our old familiar form:

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{d \textbf{x}(t)}{d t} \left(\begin{array}{c}
                 x_1 \\
                 x_2 \\
                 x_3 \\
                 x_4
               \end{array}\right) &= \left(\begin{array}{ccc}
                 0  & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
                 0  & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
                 0  & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
                 0  & 0 & 0 & 0
               \end{array}\right) \left(\begin{array}{c}
                 x_1 \\
                 x_2 \\
                 x_3 \\
                 x_4
               \end{array}\right)
\end{align}
$$

## 4. Ito Integral

Die Gradienten werden mit einem Rauschterm kombiniert, um die Stichproben zu erzeugen. Die Stichproben werden dann verwendet, um die Gradienten zu schätzen, und der Prozess wird wiederholt. Dieser iterative Prozess kann als Markovkette bestehend aus Updates beschrieben werden:

$$x_t = x_{t-1} + \frac{\delta}{2} \nabla_x \log p(x_{t-1}) + \sqrt{\delta} \epsilon_t; \hspace{10px} \epsilon_t \sim \mathcal{N}(0, \textbf{I}) $$

mit $$\delta$$ als die Schrittgröße der Updates. Wenn wir $$T \to 0$$ gehen lassen, geht $$\epsilon \to 0$$ und wir erhalten die tatsächliche Wahrscheinlichkeitsverteilung $$p(x)$$.

## 5. Ito's Lemma

## 6. Solving linear SDEs
